# Project 2: User Programs

## Preliminaries

>Fill in your name and email address.

Jin Yang <2000012935@stu.pku.edu.cn>

>If you have any preliminary comments on your submission, notes for the TAs, please give them here.

>I feel ashamed that I didn't find my bugs in process_wait() until I start writing the document. Well, it's fixed now, perhaps. Anyway, the document is based on the latest version instead of the handed one.


>Please cite any offline or online sources you consulted while preparing your submission, other than the Pintos documentation, course text, lecture notes, and course staff.  

>The ICS shell-lab.  
>The xv6 syscall code.  
>Websites about i386 architecture.
>Websites about Linux wait command.


## Argument Passing

#### DATA STRUCTURES

>A1: Copy here the declaration of each new or changed struct or struct member, global or static variable, typedef, or enumeration.  Identify the purpose of each in 25 words or less.  

>In process.c

    typedef union
    {
	    void *vp;
	    char *cp1;
	    char **cp2;
	    char ***cp3;
	    int *ip;
	    unsigned u;
	    void (**ret_addr)(void);
    } esp_t;

>This esp_t type avoids type casts, since the stack pointer could be anything.

#### ALGORITHMS

>A2: Briefly describe how you implemented argument parsing.  How do you arrange for the elements of argv[] to be in the right order?
>How do you avoid overflowing the stack page?  

>How to implement argument parsing?
>>Firstly, I separate the first token and the rest in start_process(). The first token is the thread's name and the rest is pass to function arg_pass(), where I separate the argument strings. 
>>In arg_pass(), I separate the rest tokens and put them in the array argv[]. Then I add alignment, use memcpy() to push the pointers to argv[]. Finally push argv, argc and fake return address.  

>Way of arranging for the elements of argv[] to be in the right order.  
>>I decrease the esp first, and the use memcpy() to copy the pointers to the right position.  

>How to avoid overflowing the stack page?
>>I decide not to check the esp until it fails. if overflow happens, it will use an invalid address, causing a page fault exception, which terminates the thread and exit -1. It make sense that to terminate a process with too much arguments.

#### RATIONALE

>A3: Why does Pintos implement strtok_r() but not strtok()?  

>The difference of the two functions is that the save_ptr is provided by caller in strtok_r(), while strtok() use a static save_ptr. In pintos, we separate the commands into file name and arguments. We need to put the address of arguments somewhere so we can use later. Also, strtok() is not safe in muti-threads.


>A4: In Pintos, the kernel separates commands into a executable name and arguments.  In Unix-like systems, the shell does this separation.  Identify at least two advantages of the Unix approach.  

>1) Unix approach Shortens the time inside the kernel and makes the kernel smaller.
>2) Unix approach is safer since it can checks the arguments outside the kernel, avoiding kernel panic while handling arguments. 
>3) Unix approach is more extendable, since it is much more convenient to write or change codes in a shell.



## System Calls

#### DATA STRUCTURES

>B1: Copy here the declaration of each new or changed struct or struct member, global or static variable, typedef, or enumeration.  Identify the purpose of each in 25 words or less. 

>In thread.h

    struct thread
    {
    ...
    #ifdef USERPROG
	/* Owned by userprog/process.c. */
	uint32_t *pagedir;	 /**< Page directory. */
	struct process *process; /**< Pointer to process. */
    #endif
    ...
    }
> Add a pointer to a process.  
 
> In process.h

    struct process
    {
        pid_t pid;             /**< Process identifier. */
        struct thread *thread; /**< Pointer to thread. */
        bool load_success;     /**< Whether successfully load file. */
        int exit_status;       /**< Process exit code. */

        struct list child;      /**< List of child process. */
        bool child_exited;      /**< If the parent needs to free the child. */
        bool parent_exited;     /**< If the parent process exited. */
        struct process *parent; /**< Parent process. */

        struct semaphore sema_exec; /**< Block parent while executing. */
        struct semaphore sema_wait; /**< Block parent while waiting. */

        struct list_elem allelem; /**< List element for all processes list. */
        struct list_elem elem;    /**< List element. */

        int fd;            /**< Max fd of the process. */
        struct list files; /**< Files the process opened. */
        struct file *file; /**< File that the process execute. */
    };
>A user process to handle process functions

    struct open_file
    {
        int fd;                /* File descriptor. */
        struct file *fp;       /* File pointer. */
        struct list_elem elem; /* List element. */
    };
>An opened file to hanlde file descriptor and file pointer. 

    typedef int pid_t;
    typedef int tid_t;
>Pid type and tid type. Tid_t is defined in thread.h, but without typedef here there is an error. I can't figure out why.

>In process.c

    static struct list all_list;
>List of all processes.

    static struct lock file_lock;
>Lock for synchronization in file operation.

>In syscall.c

    static void (*syscalls[MAX_SYSCALL_NUM])(struct intr_frame *)
>A syscall function array, **MAX_SYSCALL_NUM** is 13 in userprog. The idea is from xv6 code.

>B2: Describe how file descriptors are associated with open files. Are file descriptors unique within the entire OS or just within a single process?

>I use a struct called open_file to store file descriptor(fd) and file pointer(fp). In a process, **fileno()** is used to search for an fd by given fp, while **fdopen()** is used to search for an open_file struct by given fd.
>The file descriptors are unique within single process, since process in pintos is a thread in fact. Threads don't share file descriptors. And it's easier to free memory and recycle resources in each process if file descriptors are unique just with a single process.


#### ALGORITHMS

>B3: Describe your code for reading and writing user data from the kernel.

> Reading:
> Firstly I use **check_valid()** to check whether the arguments are valid. If not valid, it triggers a page fault and returns -1. Then I check the fd. If fd is 0, the STDIN_FILENO, I use **input_getc()** to read from keyboard. For other cases, I use **fdopen()** to find the open_file, which searchs for the open_file by given fd in a process' file list. If it doesn't exist, return -1. If the open_file is found, I acquire the lock **file_lock** first, then call **file_read()** and finally release the lock. Fd 1 is a special case and exits with -1 at once.

> Writing:
> Similar with reading, check the arguments first. If fd is 1, the STDOUT_FILENO, use **putbuf()** to print to the console. Other cases are almost the same as reading, and the only difference is using **file_write()** to write to the found file. Fd 0 is also a special case and exits with -1. 


>B4: Suppose a system call causes a full page (4,096 bytes) of data
>to be copied from user space into the kernel.  What is the least
>and the greatest possible number of inspections of the page table
>(e.g. calls to pagedir_get_page()) that might result?  What about
>for a system call that only copies 2 bytes of data?  Is there room
>for improvement in these numbers, and how much?

>Both have the greatest 2 if the data is not in one page and the least 1 if the data is in one page. I cannot find a way to improve it.


>B5: Briefly describe your implementation of the "wait" system call
>and how it interacts with process termination.

>The wait syscall calls process_wait(), so I just talk about process_wait().
>In process_wait(), I check if the current thread is initial thread. Then I search for the process in the current thread's child list(for initial thread, the all_list). If it is not found, return -1. If the current thread has a child with the given pid, sema_down() **sema_wait** to wait until its child exits. Then I get the exit_status before free the memory of the child process. Finally return the exit code.
>If the child exits normally in sys_exit(), its exit code will be set in sys_exit().
>If the child is terminated by kernel, its exit code will not change and the default value is -1.
>If the parent waits twice or more, since the resource is recycled, the child will not be found. So the process_wait() returns -1.
>If the parent is terminated before the child, process_wait() just frees the memory and then exits.  


>B6: Any access to user program memory at a user-specified address
>can fail due to a bad pointer value.  Such accesses must cause the
>process to be terminated.  System calls are fraught with such
>accesses, e.g. a "write" system call requires reading the system
>call number from the user stack, then each of the call's three
>arguments, then an arbitrary amount of user memory, and any of
>these can fail at any point.  This poses a design and
>error-handling problem: how do you best avoid obscuring the primary
>function of code in a morass of error-handling?  Furthermore, when
>an error is detected, how do you ensure that all temporarily
>allocated resources (locks, buffers, etc.) are freed?  In a few
>paragraphs, describe the strategy or strategies you adopted for
>managing these issues.  Give an example.

>First, avoiding bad user memory access is done by **check_valid()**, which checks whether the given address is a user address, checks whether it is mapped and uses **get_user()** to check whether its 4 bits can be accessed. Taking **write(int fd, const void * buf, unsigned count)** as an example, it checks its 3 arguments and it checks *buf to find whether the string is valid. If one is invalid when checking, a page fault occurs and terminates the process with exit code -1.

>Second, when an error happened, I handle it in page_fault handler. Taking bad-jump2 as an example, it attempts to access the invalid address **0xc000000**, triggering a page fault. In page_fault handler, it is found that the address is invalid and it is a bad reference caused by syscall. So the thread is terminated with exit code -1. And I don't have to free the resources since the whole page will be freed after the thread exits.


#### SYNCHRONIZATION

>B7: The "exec" system call returns -1 if loading the new executable
>fails, so it cannot return before the new executable has completed
>loading.  How does your code ensure this?  How is the load
>success/failure status passed back to the thread that calls "exec"?

>To ensure that, I use a **sema_exec**. After successfully creating a new thread in process_execute(), I **sema_down()** the **sema_exec** to run the child process. After executing the code in start_process(), whether successfully or not, **sema_up()** the **sema_exec** to go back to the parent process.
>To pass back the status, I use a **bool load_success**. It is set to true if load successfully, and false if not.


>B8: Consider parent process P with child process C.  How do you
>ensure proper synchronization and avoid race conditions when P
>calls wait(C) before C exits?  After C exits?  How do you ensure
>that all resources are freed in each case?  How about when P
>terminates without waiting, before C exits?  After C exits?  Are
>there any special cases?

>To ensure proper synchronization, I use a **sema_wait**. In process_wait(), I **sema_down()** the **sema_wait** and parent waits until child finishes. And the child resources are freed in process_wait(), so if child fails to load in process_execute(), I **sema_up()** the **sema_wait** to free child's memory. It is also used in process_exit() for the same reason.
>So in the cases above:
>>1) P calls wait(C) before C exits
>>This is the most common situation. P just waits until C finishes and wait() returns the exit code of C. 
>>2) P calls wait(C) after C exits
>>In process_wait(), it tries to find C and fails. So it returns -1 at once. 
>>3) P terminates without waiting before C exits.
>>In my latest version, I set the **parent_exited** for each child when parent exited. If P terminates without waiting before C exits, C will free the resource in **process_exit()**.
>>4) P terminates after C exits
>> Also, I set the **child_exited** when a process exits if its parent hasn't exited yet. When P terminates, P will free C.

#### RATIONALE

>B9: Why did you choose to implement access to user memory from the
>kernel in the way that you did?
>I use the second approach. As is said in the pintos web, it is faster and more extendable. However, I can't figure out the way of using **put_user()** by now. 


>B10: What advantages or disadvantages can you see to your design
>for file descriptors?
>I use an **open_file** struct. Each process has a list of open_files and has its own max_fd.
 
>Advantages:
>1) Thread-struct’s space is minimized
>2) Each process has its own file descriptors, which makes it easier to extend the function e.g. file mode.

>Disadvantages:
>1) Consumes kernel space, user program may open lots of files to crash the kernel.
>2) Consumes too much time to find fd or fp. Hash table may be a better choice rather than list.


>B11: The default tid_t to pid_t mapping is the identity mapping.
>If you changed it, what advantages are there to your approach?

>I didn’t change it. It’s reasonable and implementable. 
